
THE SOUL SPECTROSCOPE

The Singular Materialism of a Progressive Thinker


PROFESSOR TYNDALL'S VIEWS MORE THAN JUSTIFIED BY THE EXPERIMENTS
OF THE CELEBRATED PROFESSOR DUMMKOPT OF BOSTON, MASS.

BOSTON, December 13--Professor Dummkopf, a German gentleman of
education and ingenuity, at present residing in this city, is engaged
on experiments which, if successful, will work a great change both in
metaphysical science and in the practical relationships of life.

The professor is firm in the conviction that modern science has
narrowed down to almost nothing the border territory between the
material and the immaterial. It may be some time, he admits, before
any man shall be able to point his finger and say with authority,
"Here mind begins; here matter ends." It may be found that the
boundary line between mina and matter is as purely imaginary as the
equator that divides the northern from the southern hemisphere. It may
be found that mind is essentially objective as is matter, or that
matter is as entirely Subjective as is mind. It may be that there is
no matter except as conditioned in mind. It may be that there is no
mind except as conditioned in matter. Professor Dummkopf's views upon
this broad topic are interesting, although somewhat bewildering. I can
cordially recommend the great work in nine volumes,
Koerperliehegelswissenschaft, to any reader who may be inclined to
follow up the subject. The work can undoubtedly be obtained in the
original Leipzig edition through any responsible importer of foreign
books.

Great as is the problem suggested above, Professor Dummkopf has no
doubt whatever that it will be solved, and at no distant day. He
himself has taken a masterly stride toward a solution by the brilliant
series of experiments I am about to describe. He not only believes
with Tyndall that matter contains the promise and potency of all life,
but he believes that every force, physical, intellectual, and moral,
may be resolved into matter, formulated in terms of matter, and
analyzed into its constituent forms of matter; that motion is matter,
mind is matter, law is matter, and even that abstract relations of
mathematical abstractions are purely material.

PHOTOGRAPHING SMELL

In accordance with an invitation extended to me at the last meeting of
the Radical Club--an organization, by the way, which is doing a noble
work in extending our knowledge of the Unknowable--I dallied yesterday
at Professor Dummkopf's rooms in Joy Street, at the West End. I found
the professor in his apartment on the upper floor, busily engaged in
an attempt to photograph smell.

"You see," he said, as he stirred up a beaker from which strongly
marked fumes of sulphuretied hydrogen were arising and filling the
room, "you see that, having demonstrated the objectiveness of
sensation, it has now become my privilege and easy task to show that
the phenomena of sensation are equally material. Hence I am attempting
to photograph smell."

The professor then darted behind a camera which was leveled upon the
vessel in which the suffocating fumes were generated and busied
himself awhile with the plate.

A disappointed look stole over his face as he brought the negative to
the light and examined it anxiously. "Not yet, not yet!" he said
sadly, "but patience and improved appliances will finally bring it.
The trouble is in my tools, you see, and not in my theory. I did fancy
the other day that I obtained a distinctly marked negative from the
odor of a hot onion stew, and the thought has cheered me ever since.
But it's bound to come. I tell you, my worthy friend, the actinic ray
wasn't made for nothing. Could you accommodate me with a dollar and a
quarter to buy some more collodion?"

THE BOTTLE THEORY OF SOUND

I expressed my cheerful readiness to be banker to genius.

"Thanks," said the professor, pocketing the scrip and resuming his
position at the camera. "When I have pictorially captured smell, the
most palpable of the senses, the next thing will be to imprison
sound--vulgarly speaking, to bottle it. Just think a moment. Force is
as imperishable as matter; indeed, as I have been somewhat successful
in showing, it is matter. Now, when a sound wave is once started, it
is only lost through an indefinite extension of its circumference.
Catch that sound wave, sir! Catch it in a bottle, then its
circumference cannot extend. You may keep the sound wave forever if
you will only keep it corked up tight. The only difficulty is in
bottling it in the first place. I shall attend to the details of that
operation just as soon as I have managed to photograph the confounded
rotten-egg smell of sulphydric acid."

The professor stirred up the offensive mixture with a glass rod, and
continued:

"While my object in bottling sound is mainly scientific, I must
confess that I see in success in that direction a prospect of
considerable pecuniary profit. I shall be prepared at no distant day
to put operas in quart bottles, labeled and assorted, and contemplate
a series of light and popular airs in ounce vials at prices to suit
the times. You know very well that it costs a ten-dollar bill now to
take a lady to hear Martha or Mignon, rendered in first-class style.
By the bottle system, the same notes may be heard in one's own parlor
at a comparatively trifling expense. I could put the operas into the
market at from eighty cents to a dollar a bottle. For oratorios and
symphonies I should use demijohns, and the cost would of course be
greater. I don't think that ordinary bottles would hold Wagner's
music. It might be necessary to employ carboys. Sir, if I were of the
sanguine habit of you Americans, I should say that there were millions
in it. Being a phlegmatic Teuton, accustomed to the precision and
moderation of scientific language, I will merely say that in the
success of my experiments with sound I see a comfortable income, as
well as great renown.

A SCIENTIFIC MARVEL

By this time the professor had another negative, but an eager
examination of it yielded nothing more satisfactory than before. He
sighed and continued:

"Having photographed smell and bottled sound, I shall proceed to a
project as much higher than this as the reflective faculties are
higher than the perceptive, as the brain is more exalted than the ear
or nose.

"I am perfectly satisfied that elements of mind are just as
susceptible of detection and analysis as elements of matter. Why, mind
is matter.

"The soul spectroscope, or, as it will better be known, Dummkopf's
duplex self-registering soul spectroscope, is based on the broad fact
that whatever is material may be analyzed and determined by the
position of the Frauenhofer lines upon the spectrum. If soul is
matter, soul may thus be analyzed and determined. Place a subject
under the light, and the minute exhalations or emanations proceeding
from his soul--and these exhalations or emanations are, of course,
matter--will be represented by their appropriate symbols upon the face
of a properly arranged spectroscope.

"This, in short, is my discovery. How I shall arrange the
spectroscope, and how I shall locate the subject with reference to the
light is of course my secret. I have applied for a patent. I shall
exploit the instrument and its practical workings at the Centennial.
Till then I must decline to enter into any more explicit description
of the invention."

THE IMPORTANCE OF THE DISCOVERY

"What will be the bearing of your great discovery in its practical
workings?"

"I can go so far as to give you some idea of what those practical
workings are. The effect of the soul spectroscope upon everyday
affairs will be prodigious, simply prodigious. All lying, deceit,
double dealing, hypocrisy, will be abrogated under its operation. It
will bring about a millennium of truth and sincerity.

"A few practical illustrations. No more bell punches on the horse
railroad. The superintendent, with a smattering of scientific
knowledge and one of my soul spectroscopes in his office, will examine
with the eye of infallible science every applicant for the position of
conductor and will determine by the markings on his spectrum whether
there is dishonesty in his soul, and this as readily as the chemist
decides whether there is iron in a meteorolite or hydrogen in Saturn's
ring.

"No more courts, judges, or juries. Hereafter justice will be
represented with both eyes wide open and with one of my duplex self-
registering soul spectroscopes in her right hand. The inmost nature of
the accused will be read at a glance and he will be acquitted,
imprisoned for thirty days, or hung, just as the Frauenhofer lines
which lay bare his soul may determine.

"No more official corruption or politicians' lies. The important
element in every campaign will be one of my soul spectroscopes, and it
will effect the most radical, and, at the same time, the most
practicable of civil service reforms.

"No more young stool pigeons in tall towers. No man will subscribe for
a daily newspaper until a personal inspection of its editor's soul by
means of one of my spectroscopes has convinced him that he is paying
for truth, honest conviction, and uncompromising independence, rather
than for the false utterances of a hired conscience and a bought
judgment.

"No more unhappy marriages. The maiden will bring her glibly promising
lover to me before she accepts or rejects his proposal, and I shall
tell her whether his spectrum exhibits the markings of pure love,
constancy, and tenderness, or of sordid avarice, vacillating
affections, and post-nuptial cruelty. I shall be the angel with
shining sword (or rather spectroscope] who shall attend Hymen and
guard the entrance to his paradise.

"No more shame. If anything be wanting in the character of a mean, no
amount of brazen pretension on his part can place the missing line in
his spectrum. If anything is lacking in him, it will be lacking there.
I found by a long series of experiments upon the imperfectly
constituted minds of the patients in the lunatic asylum at Taunton-"

"Then you have been at Taunton?"

"Yes. For two years I pursued my studies among the unfortunate inmates
of that institution. Not exactly as a patient myself, you understand,
but as a student of the phenomena of morbid intellectual developments.
But I see I am wearying you, and I must resume my photography before
this stuff stops smelling. Come again."

Having bid the professor farewell and wished him abundant success in
his very interesting experiments, I went home and read again for the
thirty-ninth time Professor Tyndall's address at Belfast.

