
THE CLOCK THAT WENT BACKWARD

A row of Lombardy poplars stood in front of my great-aunt Gertrude's
house, on the bank of the Sheepscot River. In personal appearance my
aunt was surprisingly like one of those trees. She had the look of
hopeless anemia that distinguishes them from fuller blooded sorts. She
was tall, severe in outline, and extremely thin. Her habiliments clung
to her. I am sure that had the gods found occasion to impose upon her
the fate of Daphne she would have taken her place easily and naturally
in the dismal row, as melancholy a poplar as the rest.

Some of my earliest recollections are of this venerable relative.
Alive and dead she bore an important part in the events I am about to
recount: events which I believe to be without parallel in the
experience of mankind.

During our periodical visits of duty to Aunt Gertrude in Maine, my
cousin Harry and myself were accustomed to speculate much on her age.
Was she sixty, or was she six score? We had no precise information;
she might have been either. The old lady was surrounded by old-
fashioned things. She seemed to live altogether in the past. In her
short half-hours of communicativeness, over her second cup of tea, or
on the piazza where the poplars sent slim shadows directly toward the
east, she used to tell us stories of her alleged ancestors. I say
alleged, because we never fully believed that she had ancestors.

A genealogy is a stupid thing. Here is Aunt Gertrude's, reduced to its
simplest forms:

Her great-great-grandmother (1599-1642) was a woman of Holland who
married a Puritan refugee, and sailed from Leyden to Plymouth in the
ship Ann in the year of our Lord 1632. This Pilgrim mother had a
daughter, Aunt Gertrude's great-grandmother (1640-1718). She came to
the Eastern District of Massachusetts in the early part of the last
century, and was carried off by the Indians in the Penobscot wars. Her
daughter (1680-1776) lived to see these colonies free and independent,
and contributed to the population of the coming republic not less than
nineteen stalwart sons and comely daughters. One of the latter (1735-
1802) married a Wiscasset skipper engaged in the West India trade,
with whom she sailed. She was twice wrecked at sea--once on what is
now Seguin Island and once on San Salvador. It was on San Salvador
that Aunt Gertrude was born.

We got to be very tired of hearing this family history. Perhaps it was
the constant repetition and the merciless persistency with which the
above dates were driven into our young ears that made us skeptics. As
I have said, we took little stock in Aunt Gertrude's ancestors. They
seemed highly improbable. In our private opinion the great-
grandmothers and grandmothers and so forth were pure myths, and Aunt
Gertrude herself was the principal in all the adventures attributed to
them, having lasted from century to century while generations of
contemporaries went the way of all flesh.

On the first landing of the square stairway of the mansion loomed a
tall Dutch clock. The case was more than eight feet high, of a dark
red wood, not mahogany, and it was curiously inlaid with silver. No
common piece of furniture was this. About a hundred years ago there
flourished in the town of Brunswick a horologist named Cary, an
industrious and accomplished workman. Few well-to-do houses on that
part of the coast lacked a Cary timepiece. But Aunt Gertrude's clock
had marked the hours and minutes of two full centuries before the
Brunswick artisan was born. It was running when William the Taciturn
pierced the dikes to relieve Leyden. The name of the maker, Jan
Lipperdam, and the date, 1572, were still legible in broad black
letters and figures reaching quite across the dial. Cary's
masterpieces were plebeian and recent beside this ancient aristocrat.
The jolly Dutch moon, made to exhibit the phases over a landscape of
windmills and polders, was cunningly painted. A skilled hand had
carved the grim ornament at the top, a death's head transfixed by a
two-edged sword. Like all timepieces of the sixteenth century, it had
no pendulum. A simple Van Wyck escapement governed the descent of the
weights to the bottom of the tall case.

But these weights never moved. Year after year, when Harry and I
returned to Maine, we found the hands of the old clock pointing to the
quarter past three, as they had pointed when we first saw them. The
fat moon hung perpetually in the third quarter, as motionless as the
death's head above. There was a mystery about the silenced movement
and the paralyzed hands. Aunt Gertrude told us that the works had
never performed their functions since a bolt of lightning entered the
clock; and she showed us a black hole in the side of the case near the
top, with a yawning rift that extended downward for several feet. This
explanation failed to satisfy us. It did not account for the sharpness
of her refusal when we proposed to bring over the watchmaker from the
village, or for her singular agitation once when she found Harry on a
stepladder, with a borrowed key in his hand, about to test for himself
the clock's suspended vitality.

One August night, after we had grown out of boyhood, I was awakened by
a noise in the hallway. I shook my cousin. "Somebody's in the house,"
I whispered.

We crept out of our room and on to the stairs. A dim light came from
below. We held breath and noiselessly descended to the second landing.
Harry clutched my arm. He pointed down over the banisters, at the same
time drawing me back into the shadow.

We saw a strange thing.

Aunt Gertrude stood on a chair in front of the old clock, as spectral
in her white nightgown and white nightcap as one of the poplars when
covered with snow. It chanced that the floor creaked slightly under
our feet. She turned with a sudden movement, peering intently into the
darkness, and holding a candle high toward us, so that the light was
full upon her pale face. She looked many years older than when I bade
her good night. For a few minutes she was motionless, except in the
trembling arm that held aloft the candle. Then, evidently reassured,
she placed the light upon a shelf and turned again to the clock.

We now saw the old lady take a key from behind the face and proceed to
wind up the weights. We could hear her breath, quick and short. She
rested a band on either side of the case and held her face close to
the dial, as if subjecting it to anxious scrutiny. In this attitude
she remained for a long time. We heard her utter a sigh of relief, and
she half turned toward us for a moment. I shall never forget the
expression of wild joy that transfigured her features then.

The hands of the clock were moving; they were moving backward.

Aunt Gertrude put both arms around the clock and pressed her withered
cheek against it. She kissed it repeatedly. She caressed it in a
hundred ways, as if it had been a living and beloved thing. She
fondled it and talked to it, using words which we could hear but could
not understand. The hands continued to move backward.

Then she started back with a sudden cry. The clock had stopped. We saw
her tall body swaying for an instant on the chair. She stretched out
her arms in a convulsive gesture of terror and despair, wrenched the
minute hand to its old place at a quarter past three, and fell heavily
to the floor.

II

Aunt Gertrude's will left me her bank and gas stocks, real estate,
railroad bonds, and city sevens, and gave Harry the clock. We thought
at the time that this was a very unequal division, the more surprising
because my cousin had always seemed to be the favorite. Half in
seriousness we made a thorough examination of the ancient timepiece,
sounding its wooden case for secret drawers, and even probing the not
complicated works with a knitting needle to ascertain if our whimsical
relative had bestowed there some codicil or other document changing
the aspect of affairs. We discovered nothing.

There was testamentary provision for our education at the University
of Leyden. We left the military school in which we had learned a
little of the theory of war, and a good deal of the art of standing
with our noses over our heels, and took ship without delay. The clock
went with us. Before many months it was established in a corner of a
room in the Breede Straat.

The fabric of Jan Lipperdam's ingenuity, thus restored to its native
air, continued to tell the hour of quarter past three with its old
fidelity. The author of the clock had been under the sod for nearly
three hundred years. The combined skill of his successors in the craft
at Leyden could make it go neither forward nor backward.

We readily picked up enough Dutch to make ourselves understood by the
townspeople, the professors, and such of our eight hundred and odd
fellow students as came into intercourse. This language, which looks
so hard at first, is only a sort of polarized English. Puzzle over it
a little while and it jumps into your comprehension like one of those
simple cryptograms made by running together all the words of a
sentence and then dividing in the wrong places.

The language acquired and the newness of our surroundings worn off, we
settled into tolerably regular pursuits. Harry devoted himself with
some assiduity to the study of sociology, with especial reference to
the round-faced and not unkind maidens of Leyden. I went in for the
higher metaphysics.

Outside of our respective studies, we had a common ground of unfailing
interest. To our astonishment, we found that not one in twenty of the
faculty or students knew or cared a sliver about the glorious history
of the town, or even about the circumstances under which the
university itself was founded by the Prince of Orange. In marked
contrast with the general indifference was the enthusiasm of Professor
Van Stopp, my chosen guide through the cloudiness of speculative
philosophy.

This distinguished Hegelian was a tobacco-dried little old man, with a
skullcap over features that reminded me strangely of Aunt Gertrude's.
Had he been her own brother the facial resemblance could not have been
closer. I told him so once, when we were together in the Stadthuis
looking at the portrait of the hero of the siege, the Burgomaster Van
der Werf. The professor laughed. "I will show you what is even a more
extraordinary coincidence," said he; and, leading the way across the
hall to the great picture of the siege, by Warmers, he pointed out the
figure of a burgher participating in the defense. It was true. Van
Stopp might have been the burgher's son; the burgher might have been
Aunt Gertrude's father.

The professor seemed to be fond of us. We often went to his rooms in
an old house in the Rapenburg Straat, one of the few houses remaining
that antedate 1574. He would walk with us through the beautiful
suburbs of the city, over straight roads lined with poplars that
carried us back to the bank of the Sheepscot in our minds. He took us
to the top of the ruined Roman tower in the center of the town, and
from the same battlements from which anxious eyes three centuries ago
had watched the slow approach of Admiral Boisot's fleet over the
submerged polders, he pointed out the great dike of the Landscheiding,
which was cut that the oceans might bring Boisot's Zealanders to raise
the leaguer and feed the starving. He showed us the headquarters of
the Spaniard Valdez at Leyderdorp, and told us how heaven sent a
violent northwest wind on the night of the first of October, piling up
the water deep where it had been shallow and sweeping the fleet on
between Zoeterwoude and Zwieten up to the very walls of the fort at
Lammen, the last stronghold of the besiegers and the last obstacle in
the way of succor to the famishing inhabitants. Then he showed us
where, on the very night before the retreat of the besieging army, a
huge breach was made in the wall of Leyden, near the Cow Gate, by the
Walloons from Lammen.

"Why!" cried Harry, catching fire from the eloquence of the
professor's narrative, "that was the decisive moment of the siege."

The professor said nothing. He stood with his arms folded, looking
intently into my cousin's eyes.

"For," continued Harry, "had that point not been watched, or had
defense failed and the breach been carried by the night assault from
Lammen, the town would have been burned and the people massacred under
the eyes of Admiral Boisot and the fleet of relief. Who defended the
breach?"

Van Stopp replied very slowly, as if weighing every word:

"History records the explosion of the mine under the city wall on the
last night of the siege; it does not tell the story of the defense or
give the defender's name. Yet no man that ever lived had a more
tremendous charge than fate entrusted to this unknown hero. Was it
chance that sent him to meet that unexpected danger? Consider some of
the consequences had he failed. The fall of Leyden would have
destroyed the last hope of the Prince of Orange and of the free
states. The tyranny of Philip would have been reestablished. The birth
of religious liberty and of self-government by the people would have
been postponed, who knows for how many centuries? Who knows that there
would or could have been a republic of the United States of America
had there been no United Netherlands? Our University, which has given
to the world Grotius, Scaliger, Arminius, and Descartes, was founded
upon this hero's successful defense of the breach. We owe to him our
presence here today. Nay, you owe to him your very existence. Your
ancestors were of Leyden; between their lives and the butchers outside
the walls he stood that night."

The little professor towered before us, a giant of enthusiasm and
patriotism. Harry's eyes glistened and his cheeks reddened.

"Go home, boys," said Van Stopp, "and thank God that while the
burghers of Leyden were straining their gaze toward Zoeterwoude and
the fleet, there was one pair of vigilant eyes and one stout heart at
the town wall just beyond the Cow Gate!"

III

The rain was splashing against the windows one evening in the autumn
of our third year at Leyden, when Professor Van Stopp honored us with
a visit in the Breede Straat. Never had I seen the old gentleman in
such spirits. He talked incessantly. The gossip of the town, the news
of Europe, science, poetry, philosophy, were in turn touched upon and
treated with the same high and good humor. I sought to draw him out on
Hegel, with whose chapter on the complexity and interdependency of
things I was just then struggling.

"You do not grasp the return of the Itself into Itself through its
Otherself?" he said smiling. "Well, you will, sometime."

Harry was silent and preoccupied. His taciturnity gradually affected
even the professor. The conversation flagged, and we sat a long while
without a word. Now and then there was a flash of lightning succeeded
by distant thunder.

"Your clock does not go," suddenly remarked the professor. "Does it
ever go?"

"Never since we can remember," I replied. "That is, only once, and
then it went backward. It was when Aunt Gertrude-"

Here I caught a warning glance from Harry. I laughed and stammered,
"The clock is old and useless. It cannot be made to go."

"Only backward?" said the professor, calmly, and not appearing to
notice my embarrassment. "Well, and why should not a clock go
backward? Why should not Time itself turn and retrace its course?"

He seemed to be waiting for an answer. I had none to give.

"I thought you Hegelian enough," he continued, "to admit that every
condition includes its own contradiction. Time is a condition, not an
essential. Viewed from the Absolute, the sequence by which future
follows present and present follows past is purely arbitrary.
Yesterday, today, tomorrow; there is no reason in the nature of things
why the order should not be tomorrow, today, yesterday."

A sharper peal of thunder interrupted the professor's speculations.

"The day is made by the planet's revolution on its axis from west to
east. I fancy you can conceive conditions under which it might turn
from east to west, unwinding, as it were, the revolutions of past
ages. Is it so much more difficult to imagine Time unwinding itself;
Time on the ebb, instead of on the flow; the past unfolding as the
future recedes; the centuries countermarching; the course of events
proceeding toward the Beginning and not, as now, toward the End?"

"But," I interposed, "we know that as far as we are concerned the-"

"We know!" exclaimed Van Stopp, with growing scorn. "Your intelligence
has no wings. You follow in the trail of Compte and his slimy brood of
creepers and crawlers. You speak with amazing assurance of your
position in the universe. You seem to think that your wretched little
individuality has a firm foothold in the Absolute. Yet you go to bed
tonight and dream into existence men, women, children, beasts of the
past or of the future. How do you know that at this moment you
yourself, with all your conceit of nineteenth-century thought, are
anything more than a creature of a dream of the future, dreamed, let
us say, by some philosopher of the sixteenth century? How do you know
that you are anything more than a creature of a dream of the past,
dreamed by some Hegelian of the twenty-sixth century? How do you know,
boy, that you will not vanish into the sixteenth century or 2060 the
moment the dreamer awakes?"

There was no replying to this, for it was sound metaphysics. Harry
yawned. I got up and went to the window. Professor Van Stopp
approached the clock.

"Ah, my children," said he, "there is no fixed progress of human
events. Past, present, and future are woven together in one
inextricable mesh. Who shall say that this old clock is not right to
go backward?"

A crash of thunder shook the house. The storm was over our heads.

When the blinding glare had passed away, Professor Van Stopp was
standing upon a chair before the tall timepiece. His face looked more
than ever like Aunt Gertrude's. He stood as she had stood in that last
quarter of an hour when we saw her wind the clock.

The same thought struck Harry and myself.

"Hold!" we cried, as he began to wind the works. "It may be death if
you-"

The professor's sallow features shone with the strange enthusiasm that
had transformed Aunt Gertrude's.

"True," he said, "it may be death; but it may be the awakening. Past,
present, future; all woven together! The shuttle goes to and fro,
forward and back-"

He had wound the clock. The hands were whirling around the dial from
right to left with inconceivable rapidity. In this whirl we ourselves
seemed to be borne along. Eternities seemed to contract into minutes
while lifetimes were thrown off at every tick. Van Stopp, both arms
outstretched, was reeling in his chair. The house shook again under a
tremendous peal of thunder. At the same instant a ball of fire,
leaving a wake of sulphurous vapor and filling the room with dazzling
light, passed over our heads and smote the clock. Van Stopp was
prostrated. The hands ceased to revolve.

IV

The roar of the thunder sounded like heavy cannonading. The
lightning's blaze appeared as the steady light of a conflagration.
With our hands over our eyes, Harry and I rushed out into the night.

Under a red sky people were hurrying toward the Stadthuis. Flames in
the direction of the Roman tower told us that the heart of the town
was afire. The faces of those we saw were haggard and emaciated. From
every side we caught disjointed phrases of complaint or despair.
"Horseflesh at ten schillings the pound," said one, "and bread at
sixteen schillings." "Bread indeed!" an old woman retorted: "It's
eight weeks gone since I have seen a crumb." "My little grandchild,
the lame one, went last night." "Do you know what Gekke Betje, the
washerwoman, did? She was starving. Her babe died, and she and her
man-"

A louder cannon burst cut short this revelation. We made our way on
toward the citadel of the town, passing a few soldiers here and there
and many burghers with grim faces under their broad-brimmed felt hats.

"There is bread plenty yonder where the gunpowder is, and full pardon,
too. Valdez shot another amnesty over the walls this morning."

An excited crowd immediately surrounded the speaker. "But the fleet!"
they cried.

"The fleet is grounded fast on the Greenway polder. Boisot may turn
his one eye seaward for a wind till famine and pestilence have carried
off every mother's son of ye, and his ark will not be a rope's length
nearer. Death by plague, death by starvation, death by fire and
musketry--that is what the burgomaster offers us in return for glory
for himself and kingdom for Orange."

"He asks us," said a sturdy citizen, "to hold out only twenty-four
hours longer, and to pray meanwhile for an ocean wind."

"Ah, yes!" sneered the first speaker. "Pray on. There is bread enough
locked in Pieter Adriaanszoon van der Werf's cellar. I warrant you
that is what gives him so wonderful a stomach for resisting the Most
Catholic King."

A young girl, with braided yellow hair, pressed through the crowd and
confronted the malcontent. "Good people," said the maiden, "do not
listen to him. He is a traitor with a Spanish heart. I am Pieter's
daughter. We have no bread. We ate malt cakes and rapeseed like the
rest of you till that was gone. Then we stripped the green leaves from
the lime trees and willows in our garden and ate them. We have eaten
even the thistles and weeds that grew between the stones by the canal.
The coward lies."

Nevertheless, the insinuation had its effect. The throng, now become a
mob, surged off in the direction of the burgomaster's house. One
ruffian raised his hand to strike the girl out of the way. In a wink
the cur was under the feet of his fellows, and Harry, panting and
glowing, stood at the maiden's side, shouting defiance in good English
at the backs of the rapidly retreating crowd.

With the utmost frankness she put both her arms around Harry's neck
and kissed him.

"Thank you," she said. "You are a hearty lad. My name is Gertruyd van
der Wert."

Harry was fumbling in his vocabulary for the proper Dutch phrases, but
the girl would not stay for compliments. "They mean mischief to my
father"; and she hurried us through several exceedingly narrow streets
into a three-cornered market place dominated by a church with two
spires. "There he is," she exclaimed, "on the steps of St. Pancras."

There was a tumult in the market place. The conflagration raging
beyond the church and the voices of the Spanish and Walloon cannon
outside of the walls were less angry than the roar of this multitude
of desperate men clamoring for the bread that a single word from their
leader's lips would bring them. "Surrender to the King!" they cried,
"or we will send your dead body to Lammen as Leyden's token of
submission."

One tall man, taller by half a head than any of the burghers
confronting him, and so dark of complexion that we wondered how he
could be the father of Gertruyd, heard the threat in silence. When the
burgomaster spoke, the mob listened in spite of themselves.

"What is it you ask, my friends? That we break our vow and surrender
Leyden to the Spaniards? That is to devote ourselves to a fate far
more horrible than starvation. I have to keep the oath! Kill me, if
you will have it so. I can die only once, whether by your hands, by
the enemy's, or by the hand of God. Let us starve, if we must,
welcoming starvation because it comes before dishonor. Your menaces do
not move me; my life is at your disposal. Here, take my sword, thrust
it into my breast, and divide my flesh among you to appease your
hunger. So long as I remain alive expect no surrender."

There was silence again while the mob wavered. Then there were
mutterings around us. Above these rang out the clear voice of the girl
whose hand Harry still held-unnecessarily, it seemed to me.

"Do you not feel the sea wind? It has come at last. To the tower! And
the first man there will see by moonlight the full white sails of the
prince's ships."

For several hours I scoured the streets of the town, seeking in vain
my cousin and his companion; the sudden movement of the crowd toward
the Roman tower had separated us. On every side I saw evidences of the
terrible chastisement that had brought this stout-hearted people to
the verge of despair. A man with hungry eyes chased a lean rat along
the bank of the canal. A young mother, with two dead babes in her
arms, sat in a doorway to which they bore the bodies of her husband
and father, just killed at the walls. In the middle of a deserted
street I passed unburied corpses in a pile twice as high as my head.
The pestilence had been there-kinder than the Spaniard, because it
held out no treacherous promises while it dealt its blows.

Toward morning the wind increased to a gale. There was no sleep in
Leyden, no more talk of surrender, no longer any thought or care about
defense. These words were on the lips of everybody I met: "Daylight
will bring the fleet!"

Did daylight bring the fleet? History says so, but I was not a
witness. I know only that before dawn the gale culminated in a violent
thunderstorm, and that at the same time a muffled explosion, heavier
than the thunder, shook the town. I was in the crowd that watched from
the Roman Mound for the first signs of the approaching relief. The
concussion shook hope out of every face. "Their mine has reached the
wall!" But where? I pressed forward until I found the burgomaster, who
was standing among the rest. "Quick!" I whispered. "It is beyond the
Cow Gate, and this side of the Tower of Burgundy." He gave me a
searching glance, and then strode away, without making any attempt to
quiet the general panic. I followed close at his heels.

It was a tight run of nearly half a mile to the rampart in question.
When we reached the Cow Gate this is what we saw:

A great gap, where the wall had been, opening to the swampy fields
beyond: in the moat, outside and below, a confusion of upturned faces,
belonging to men who struggled like demons to achieve the breach, and
who now gained a few feet and now were forced back; on the shattered
rampart a handful of soldiers and burghers forming a living wall where
masonry had failed; perhaps a double handful of women and girls,
serving stones to the defenders and boiling water in buckets, besides
pitch and oil and unslaked lime, and some of them quoiting tarred and
burning hoops over the necks of the Spaniards in the moat; my cousin
Harry leading and directing the men; the burgomaster's daughter
Gertruyd encouraging and inspiring the women.

But what attracted my attention more than anything else was the
frantic activity of a little figure in black, who, with a huge ladle,
was showering molten lead on the heads of the assailing party. As he
turned to the bonfire and kettle which supplied him with ammunition,
his features came into the full light. I gave a cry of surprise: the
ladler of molten lead was Professor Van Stopp.

The burgomaster Van der Werf turned at my sudden exclamation. "Who is
that?" I said. "The man at the kettle?"

"That," replied Van der Werf, "is the brother of my wife, the
clockmaker Jan Lipperdam."

The affair at the breach was over almost before we had had time to
grasp the situation. The Spaniards, who had overthrown the wall of
brick and stone, found the living wall impregnable. They could not
even maintain their position in the moat; they were driven off into
the darkness. Now I felt a sharp pain in my left arm. Some stray
missile must have hit me while we watched the fight.

"Who has done this thing?" demanded the burgomaster. "Who is it that
has kept watch on today while the rest of us were straining fools'
eyes toward tomorrow?"

Gertruyd van der Werf came forward proudly, leading my cousin. "My
father," said the girl, "he has saved my life."

"That is much to me," said the burgomaster, "but it is not all. He has
saved Leyden and he has saved Holland."

I was becoming dizzy. The faces around me seemed unreal. Why were we
here with these people? Why did the thunder and lightning forever
continue? Why did the clockmaker, Jan Lipperdam, turn always toward me
the face of Professor Van Stopp? "Harry!" I said, "come back to our
rooms."

But though he grasped my hand warmly his other hand still held that of
the girl, and he did not move. Then nausea overcame me. My head swam,
and the breach and its defenders faded from sight.

V

Three days later I sat with one arm bandaged in my accustomed seat in
Van Stopp's lecture room. The place beside me was vacant.

"We hear much," said the Hegelian professor, reading from a notebook
in his usual dry, hurried tone, "of the influence of the sixteenth
century upon the nineteenth. No philosopher, as far as I am aware, has
studied the influence of the nineteenth century upon the sixteenth. If
cause produces effect, does effect never induce cause? Does the law of
heredity, unlike all other laws of this universe of mind and matter,
operate in one direction only? Does the descendant owe everything to
the ancestor, and the ancestor nothing to the descendant? Does
destiny, which may seize upon our existence, and for its own purposes
bear us far into the future, never carry us back into the past?"

I went back to my rooms in the Breede Straat, where my only companion
was the silent clock.



THE END

EOT


